VC Guide to Market Sizing
Sean Stuart
Startup Stash
Sean Stuart

·
Follow

Published in
Startup Stash

·
5 min read
·
Sep 6, 2022
110


1



Markets are a fairly ancient concept but sizing them is not.

VC: Your market is not big enough.

Founder: Wait, but a million people will want it…

VC: Yeah, but they will only ever pay $100 each.

Founder: What’s wrong with that…

VC:


Quick recap: a market exists when there are a group of customers willing to pay money for a product. Its potential size is therefore equal to the # of potential customers x the average revenue per account (ARPA).

This is the total addressable market (TAM) for that product.

The first question is how a TAM could possibly be too small for a VC if there was a $100 million opportunity. Sadly, the answer is a bit more depressing than we would think.

Most startups die.

There are a multitude of risks involved in creating a company — technical risk, execution risk and product risk, to name a few. Importantly, risk is not proportional to the size of the market. Just because a market is small does not mean the likelihood of success of that startup is any greater than a startup pursuing an enormous opportunity.

It’s counterintuitive and difficult to process as a founder because you view your company as a certainty. The VC does not, they view you as a portfolio. And they know that statistically many of their companies will fail, but the ones that do win, will return all the profits.

So, if they predict the expected value of your company, it is equal to the probability of success x potential valuation.

The easiest proxy for investors is to assume that the level of risk/probability of success is mostly constant for all investments BUT the potential valuation is a variable that is derived from TAM.

Say the TAM is $100M. A reasonable assumption is that if you win the market, you will obtain 25% market share. Applying a revenue multiple of 10x, your company would be worth $250M.

A great outcome?

Well yes, if this was a 100% certain, but it’s not.

The VC knows it’s downside is capped at the cost of each investment, but it needs to make its potential upside as large as possible for the model to work.

The VC will generally only choose companies with the potential to be unicorns or return their funds. Generally, this means a company needs to be able to obtain around $100M in ARR, as 10x multiple would give a billion-dollar valuation.


Given these calculations are so rough, some investors question the purpose of even doing them:


Note: Investors that are infinitely more accomplished think they are futile.

That being said, data suggests that their approach would be misguided. Sizing TAM does matter, but only to a point.


Nearly 88% of billion-dollar companies surveyed started with a medium to large size TAM at the time of founding.

However, many would be quick to point out that the biggest outlier companies are the ones that start in very small markets and grow exponentially, e.g., personal computers in the 70s and the internet in the 90s.

That’s why it’s imperative to understand the acceleration of a market. Acceleration of markets is caused by:

Technology changes,
Distribution channels changes,
Consumer behaviour changes, or
Regulation changes.
If there is strong evidence of one of these changes at play, then sizing TAM may be futile because it can be difficult to predict and factor in exponential growth.

But if the market of buyers is relatively constant and the pain point clearly defined, sizing TAM is useful.

For example, if you are a cemetery software company that sells to cemeteries, the TAM is likely to be fairly constant in the absence of some cataclysmic apocalypse.

Therefore, sizing TAM is good when the following ingredients are at play:

The group of buyers is clearly defined (e.g., # number of people who drink coffee), and
The pain point is well established (CRM software for sales teams).
Sizing TAM is properly futile when:

Structural changes are exponentially growing TAM (technology, distribution, consumer behaviour, regulation), and
The product is so much cheaper than existing solutions that it expands an existing market by orders of magnitude (e.g. Uber vs Taxis).
All of the mistakes investors make in sizing TAM will come from assuming a group of buyers is fairly constant without realising that a structural force is exponentially expanding the universe of buyers.

The internet is just for hobbyists, it could never be for businesses.

Crypto is for technologists, it will never be for the masses.

So, being reductive, the only question that matters when sizing markets is: is this a small market that is about to grow exponentially?

If it is, market sizing won’t help.

If it’s not, market sizing might help.

While imperfect, I like using heuristics to tell if there are signs that it is a small market about to grow exponentially.

First, I identify the structural change.

Then I assess the strength of fanaticism from the early adopters. If people have a cult like following of a particular product, there may be signs the compounding is about to begin.

Another cheeky heuristic is to listen to all the reasons why experts think the product will be a failure and won’t work for a wider market.

Crypto will never get mass adoption because gas fees are too high.

The internet will never have e-commerce because people won’t put their credit card details online.

This is a proxy that can tell you where to invest next. Generally, all their criticisms are valid, and they show you the opportunities to solve to reach mass adoption.

High Gas Fees = Optimism, Immutable X

E-commerce lacks trust = Amazon, Paypal

This is why VCs attempt to size markets.